contributing: Add branching how-to (#2963)
OSGeo/grass: doc/development/branching_how-to.md

# Branching How-To

## Assumptions

Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right
before RC1 of a new release series, please see assumptions in the
`howto_release.md` document.

## Create a New Branch

Given how the branch protection rules are set up and work,
you need to bypass protection againts merge commits on branches
(we don't want any new ones, but there are existing from the past

> which prevet creation of a new branch).

Author: We have merge commits on the main from the early GitHub times. GitHub applies the "no merge commit" rule before the branch creation.

> which prevet creation of a new branch).

Author: I reworded that in 2f27a14.

To bypass, go to _Settings > Rules > Rulesets > Rules for release branches_.
Press _Add bypass_ and add the team or user who is creating the branch.

Use GitHub web interface to create a new branch:

1. Go to _branches_.
2. Copy name of one of the existing branches.
3. Click _New branch_.
4. Paste name of the existing branch.
5. Modify the name.
6. Click _Create branch_.

> As an alterntaive to creation in GitHub, you can create a new branch using

Author: My spell check is disabled and I did not realize that. Done in 2f27a14.

> command line (instructions included at the end of the document).

Author: Done in 6d32b5d.

# Branching How-To

## Assumptions

Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right
before RC1 of a new release series, please see assumptions in the
`howto_release.md` document.

## Create a New Branch

Given how the branch protection rules are set up and work,
you need to bypass protection against merge commits on branches.

> (We don't want any new merge commits. However, there are merge commits
> from the past and they prevent creation of a new branch when the rules are
> applied.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't want any new merge commits. However, there are merge commits
from the past and they prevent the creation of a new branch when the rules are
applied.
```

Author: It is a parenthetical statement, so I used parenthesis.

To bypass, go to _Settings > Rules > Rulesets > Rules for release branches_.
Press _Add bypass_ and add the team or user who is creating the branch.

Use GitHub web interface to create a new branch:

1. Go to _branches_.

> 2. Copy name of one of the existing branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy the name of one of the existing branches.
```

> 3. Click _New branch_.
> 4. Paste name of the existing branch.
> 5. Modify the name.
> 6. Click _Create branch_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on _New branch_.
4. Paste the name of the existing branch.
5. Modify the name.
6. Click on _Create branch_.
```

As an alternative to creation in GitHub, you can
[create a new branch using command line](#create-in-command-line).

> Note down the latest commit hash on the branch which will be recorded in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note down the latest commit hash on the branch to record it in the
```

[release history overview](https://grass.osgeo.org/about/history/releases/).
The instructions for updating the website come later in the procedure.

Remove the bypass in _Settings_.

## Check the Version

```bash
git fetch upstream
git switch releasebranch_8_4
```

## Increase Version on the main Branch

The version number needs to be increased on the main branch.

```bash
git switch main
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/main
```

Update the version in the source code (use `minor` or `major`):

```bash
./utils/update_version.py minor
```

If you are using a clone you use for building GRASS GIS,
clean up (`make distclean`) your GRASS GIS build to remove
the now outdated generated version numbers.
(You don't need to build GRASS GIS if you have a fresh clone.)

> Search for all other mentions of last few versions to see if they need to be updated,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Search for all other mentions of the last few versions to see if they need to be updated,
```

for example:

```bash
grep --exclude-dir=.git -IrnE "[^0-9^a-z]8[\._][0-9][^0-9]"
grep --exclude-dir=.git -IrnE "grass8.?[0-9]"
```

After the check and update, commit

```bash
git switch -c update-version
git add -p
./utils/update_version.py suggest
git commit -m "version: ..."
git push
```

Create a PR and review and merge it as soon as possible to avoid having
the wrong version on the branch in case other PRs need to be merged.

## Server Updates

> 
> In the grass-addons repo:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### New directory on server

On grass.osgeo.org (grasslxd), new version directories need to be created: 

```bash
cd /var/www/code_and_data/
VER=grass85
mkdir -p ${VER}/manuals \
                ${VER}/source/snapshot \
                ${VER}/binary/mswindows/native \
                ${VER}/binary/linux/snapshot 
```

### Addon related

In the grass-addons repo:
```

> * Add new branch into [`.github/workflows/ci.yml`](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-addons/blob/grass8/.github/workflows/ci.yml).

Reviewer: Does this fall within Server updates? Seems to me it should go before this section as it is a change within the github repo

Author: Fixed.

## Website Updates

> Add the branch creation to the following history:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the branch creation to the release history (use the commit hash you saved earlier):
```

<https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-website/blob/master/content/about/history/releases.md>

## Additional Notes

### Making Changes in General

If you make changes, commit them:

```bash
git commit -m "version: ..."
git push
```

(You can directly push to release branches.)

### Create in Command Line

Get the latest main branch:

```bash
git switch main
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/main
```

Create the branch:

```bash

> git switch -c releasebranch_8_3

Reviewer: I know it's an example, but since 8.4 is above already...

# Branching How-To

## Assumptions

Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right before RC1 of a new release series, please see assumptions in the howto_release.md document.

## Create a New Branch

Use GitHub web interface to create a new branch:

1. Go to _branches_.
2. Copy name of one of the existing branches.
3. Click _New branch_.
4. Paste name of the existing branch.
5. Modify the name.
6. Click _Create branch_.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Note down the commit hash which will be recorded in the [release history overview](https://grass.osgeo.org/about/history/releases/).
```

> Alternatively, see below instructions for create a new branch using command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, see the instructions below to create a new branch using command line.
```

## Increase Version on the main Branch

The version number needs to be increased on the main branch.

```bash
git switch main
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/main
```

Update the version in the source code (use `minor` or `major`):

```bash
./utils/update_version.py minor
```

If you are using a clone you also use for building GRASS GIS,
rebuild GRASS GIS to update the generated version numbers.
(You don't need to build GRASS GIS if you have a fresh clone.)

Search for all other mentions of last few versions to see if they need to be updated.

```bash
git switch -c update-version
git commit -m "version: ..."
git push
```

Create a PR and review and merge it as soon as possible to avoid having
the wrong version on the branch in case other PRs need to be merged.

## Server Updates

(Here go things like updates to grass-addons repo.)

## Website Updates

(Here go things like addition of branch creation to history.)

## Create by Command Line

Get the latest main branch:

```bash
git switch main
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/main
```

Create the branch:

```bash
git switch -c releasebranch_8_3
```

Push the version to the upstream repo:

```bash
git push upstream

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Note down the commit hash which will be recorded in the [release history overview](https://grass.osgeo.org/about/history/releases/).
```

# Branching How-To

## Assumptions

> Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right before RC1 of a new release series, please see assumptions in the howto_release.md document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right before RC1
of a new release series, please see assumptions in the `howto_release.md` document.
```

# Branching How-To

## Assumptions

Given the creation of a new release branch will typically happen right
before RC1 of a new release series, please see assumptions in the
`howto_release.md` document.

## Create a New Branch

Use GitHub web interface to create a new branch:

1. Go to _branches_.
2. Copy name of one of the existing branches.
3. Click _New branch_.
4. Paste name of the existing branch.
5. Modify the name.
6. Click _Create branch_.

Note down the commit hash which will be recorded in the [release history overview](https://grass.osgeo.org/about/history/releases/).
Alternatively, see the instructions below to create a new branch using command line.

## Check the Version

```bash
git fetch upstream
git switch releasebranch_8_4
```

If you make changes, commit them:

```bash
git commit -m "version: ..."
git push
```

> (You can directly push to release branches.)

Author: For sake of brevity, let's not say things which are not possible.

## Increase Version on the main Branch

The version number needs to be increased on the main branch.

```bash
git switch main

> git fetch upstream

Reviewer 2: Yes, following these assumptions: https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/blob/main/doc/howto_release.md#assumptions

> git fetch upstream

Reviewer 3: Ok!

git rebase upstream/main
```

Update the version in the source code (use `minor` or `major`):

```bash
./utils/update_version.py minor
```

If you are using a clone you also use for building GRASS GIS,
rebuild GRASS GIS to update the generated version numbers.
(You don't need to build GRASS GIS if you have a fresh clone.)

> Search for all other mentions of last few versions to see if they need to be updated.

Author: Added example.

```bash
git switch -c update-version
git commit -m "version: ..."
git push
```

Create a PR and review and merge it as soon as possible to avoid having
the wrong version on the branch in case other PRs need to be merged.

## Server Updates

(Here go things like updates to grass-addons repo.)

## Website Updates

> (Here go things like addition of branch creation to history.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the branch creation to the following history:

<https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-website/blob/master/content/about/history/releases.md>
```
